Overview

Donkey Kong (JP) is an arcade video game released in 1981 by Nintendo. It was Nintendo's first big hit in North America and the very first game in the Mario franchise. The game was released a few years before the NES console was released, the first home console to feature this game was the Atari 2600 published in the following year of 1982. The game was a big hit with consumers and sold an estimated one million copies. The game was subsequently released on a variety of platforms, all of which can be seen below. The game spawned several sequels and was among the earliest platforming video games to be released and also the first to feature the characters Donkey Kong and Mario. In the game, the player controls Mario, originally known as Jumpman, across a series of girders in an attempt to rescue one of his first girlfriends, Pauline, known initially as "Lady," who was kidnapped by Donkey Kong. In the game, Jumpman is required to jump over barrels and other similar obstacles that Donkey Kong sends down to the hero.

The game is widely considered to be one of the most important arcade games released during the 1980s. It introduced jumping to the platform genre, and contained a plot, whereas in previous games players had no motivation for what they were doing. It was not only Nintendo's first real worldwide success, it was one of Shigeru Miyamoto's earliest gaming efforts. Miyamoto initially wanted the game to feature Popeye characters, though when they were unable to receive the license, he resorted to creating his own characters, who would soon grow into lucrative properties and the most successful and noticeable images in the video game industry {according to Nintendo Power}. Cut-scenes, while included in Pac-Man, were more impressive in this game and had a purpose to the plot. The multiple stages were also innovation and were only predated by Golf.

Nintendo released Donkey Kong in an attempt to replace unused Radar Scope units which proved unsuccessful in America, a territory where Nintendo saw potential in due to their increased interest in the industry. When Radar Scope eventually arrived, it was viewed by the general public as outdated, so when retailers refused to purchase the units, they were sent back to Nintendo. Nintendo needed to create a game that would either make or break them, and so the president of the company, Hiroshi Yamauchi, ordered Miyamoto to create a new game for the cabinet. He decided to do something new, and upon being released, it would capture the hearts of millions, start a new franchise, and shoot Nintendo to the top of the industry. This was the beginning of a fresh start for a nearly 100-year-old company. After a continuous stream of failures, Nintendo finally found their saving grace. A new generation started, and it was only the beginning.

Legacy

The legacy of Donkey Kong continues on to this day. Donkey Kong defined the platforming genre, and essentially all future platforming games can thank Donkey Kong for their success. Two sequels were made in response to the game including Donkey Kong Jr. and Donkey Kong 3. Donkey Kong Jr. was extremely successful, and contained unique platforming elements, while Donkey Kong 3 failed to make a name for itself, perhaps because Nintendo resorted to making it, of all things, a shooter instead of a platform game. Another game was released for the Game Boy called Donkey Kong '94 that featured the original four levels as well as 97 others.

After the Donkey Kong name had come, it quickly went away when Nintendo resorted to using its star character Mario in games instead of the villain. Mario would appear in the spin-off ultra hit Mario Bros., which introduced Mario's brother Luigi. Mario would go on to star in three classic Nintendo Entertainment System titles within the Super Mario Bros. series, and after Super Mario Bros., Donkey Kong would never make an appearance in a main Mario platform game.

In the 1990s, Nintendo second party Rare was given a chance to revive one of two franchises. The two franchises included Kid Icarus and Donkey Kong. The ultimately chose Donkey Kong due to his popularity in the '80s and totally recreated the series. In the games, you would control Donkey Kong and a few new friends. It didn't contain the spirit of the original, though the Donkey Kong Country series became super popular due to their 3D-esque graphics.

In 2004, Nintendo decided to make Donkey Kong the villain again and have Mario stop him. Donkey Kong wasn't as evil as he was in the original, and Mario wasn't as ruthless. Nintendo Software Technology in Redmond decided to take the reins to create a puzzle based game called Mario vs. Donkey Kong for the Game Boy Advance. A sequel was made for the Nintendo DS titled Mario vs. Donkey Kong 2: March of the Minis, which featured for the first time in years Pauline, which confirmed that she was still around, but that she and Mario were just friends now.

Meanwhile, on the console side of things, Nintendo and Namco teamed up to create the DK Bongos, which would be used to control a series of three Donkey Konga music-based games. While those games were successful, it was Donkey Kong Jungle Beat that really hit the nail on the head. Developed by Nintendo EAD Tokyo, they took the DK Bongos and made a platformer that made use of the controls.

In Super Smash Bros. Brawl for the Wii, an almost exact replica of the 75m stage is present as an unlockable stadium. Among other Donkey Kong related features are music by Hirokazu "Hip" Tanaka, stickers, trophies, and a demo of Nintendo Entertainment System version of the game in which you can play less than a minute on the 75m stage. In the entire series, the Hammer from this game is present as a weapon and is considered to be one of the most powerful weapons in the game, save for the Smash Ball and Dragoon in Brawl.