Overview

The Legend of Zelda​ (JP) is a high fantasy action-adventure video game series created by legendary Japanese game designers Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka and developed and published by Nintendo with some portable installments such as The Legend of Zelda: The Minish Cap developed by Flagship/Capcom.

The gameplay consists of a mixture of exploration, dungeon crawling, puzzle solving, and role-playing elements. While the games lack experience points like most conventional RPGs, the player still progresses over the course of the game by collecting items, weapons and magic that increases their abilities and gives them access to new areas.

The series is set in the medieval fantasy world of Hyrule. The land of Hyrule was created by three goddesses in ancient times and is incredibly beautiful and prosperous thanks to the power of three golden triangles known as the Triforce. However, the Triforce also attracts the attention of greedy humans who seek to steal it's power for their own ends and wicked demons who wish to corrupt the Triforce for evil purposes. In most games the player takes control of a green-clad young man named Link, wielding a sword in one hand and a shield in another. While the different incarnations of Link are usually a different character from game to game they always possesses great bravery and courage. Another recurring aspect of the series is Princess Zelda the princess of Hyrule and reincarnation of the goddess of light Hylia. Zelda often aids Link with her magical abilities and sometimes fights alongside him to defend the land of Hyrule. The most recurring villain in the series is Ganon, a pig-like demon who was originally the human overlord Ganondorf. While most games take place in Hyrule, other settings and antagonists have appeared throughout the games, with Vaati having recently become the series' secondary antagonist.

As of April 2010, The Legend of Zelda series has sold over 70 million copies since the release of the first game, The Legend of Zelda and continues to be successful worldwide.

The series consists of nineteen official games on all of Nintendo's major consoles, as well as several spin-offs. An American animated series based on the games aired in 1989, and manga adaptions which are officially endorsed and commissioned by Nintendo have been produced in Japan since 1997.