Overview

Mario (or Super Mario) is a long-running media franchise developed and produced by Nintendo. The titular character of the franchise is Mario, a fictional Italian plumber who serves as the hero of a place called the Mushroom Kingdom. The franchise was started by game designer Shigeru Miyamoto, with the first installment being Mario Bros., a Game & Watch game released in early 1983, with an arcade version following shortly after. The predecessor franchise to Mario is Donkey Kong, which had its first installment, Donkey Kong, released on July 9, 1981 for arcade systems.
The games were primarily developed and self-published internally by Nintendo, while other companies such as Hudson Soft, Square Enix, AlphaDream, Retro Studios, and several more, developed Mario games under Nintendo's supervision. Beginning with third-generation consoles onward, most installments in the series have been developed for various Nintendo game systems and handhelds.

The Super Mario series is the main one of the franchise, consisting of platformer titles that usually revolve around Mario and Luigi protecting the Mushroom Kingdom and Princess Peach from Bowser and his Koopa Troop. Both brothers make use of their trademark jumping ability that effectively allows them to proceed through levels, and are also able to acquire a variety of useful power-ups. The franchise also consists of other genres which include racing games such as the Mario Kart series, sports such as Mario Tennis, role-playing games (RPG) such as the Mario & Luigi series, and several educational games.

The Mario franchise totals over 200 video games, with a combined selling of over 600 million copies. Mario also has appearances in other media such as comics, television series, books, and a feature film. Being the flagship franchise of Nintendo, Mario has garnered massive critical acclaim and is highly recognized worldwide as the best-selling franchise.

History

The Mario series began in 1981 with Donkey Kong. Created by Shigeru Miyamoto, Donkey Kong was Nintendo's first big success. Originally, Mario was known as Jumpman, but it was later changed to the former when Nintendo of America nicknamed the character Mario after their landlord, Mario Segale.

Mario returned to the series as the villain of Donkey Kong Jr. However, he was replaced by Stanley the Bugman in Donkey Kong 3.

Early Famicom Era (1983 – 1985)

The Mario franchise began in 1983 when Mario got his own game, Mario Bros., also being the first game to feature Luigi.

Mario and Donkey Kong also appeared in several Game & Watch games.

NES and Game Boy Era (1985 - 2001)

Mario's first outing on the NES was Super Mario Bros. It sold around forty million copies worldwide, making it the best-selling game of all time. The game introduced many of the hallmarks of the series including Bowser, Princess Peach, Toads, Mushrooms, Fire Flowers, Starmen, Koopa Troopas, and Goombas.

In the wake of the success of Super Mario Bros., a sequel, Super Mario Bros. 2, was released in 1987. In Japan, the game was similar to Super Mario Bros. It was later released in America as Super Mario Bros.: The Lost Levels on the Wii's Virtual Console and the compilation, Super Mario All-Stars. In America, Super Mario Bros. 2 was the same as the Japanese game Doki Doki Panic, but with Mario characters. The American version allowed players to play as Princess Peach and Toad for the first time and was re-released in Japan as Super Mario USA.

In 1989, Mario made its debut on the Game Boy with Super Mario Land. It sold 18.06 million copies, making it the bestselling game not bundled with a console in history. This game introduced the good friend of Mario's, Princess Daisy. The sequel was Super Mario Land 2: 6 Golden Coins, released in 1992, which introduced Mario's rival, Wario.

Mario returned to the NES in 1990 with Super Mario Bros. 3. The game returned to the formula of Super Mario Bros. It introduced many new powers such as the Super Leaf, Tanooki Suit, Hammer Suit, and Frog Suit. It also was the first appearance of the Koopalings. It sold 17.8 million copies.

In 1990, Mario became a doctor with Dr. Mario.

In 1999 and 2000, Mario became a sport hero with Game Boy titles Mario Golf and Mario Tennis (Game Boy Color).